---
sidebar_label: Deploy in Docker
title: Get Started with TDengine Using Docker
description: Quickly experience TDengine's efficient insertion and querying using Docker
slug: /get-started/deploy-in-docker
---

You can install TDengine in a Docker container and perform some basic tests to verify its performance.

To install TDengine on your local machine instead of in a container, see [Get Started with TDengine Using an Installation Package](../deploy-from-package/).

## Before You Begin

- Install Docker. For more information, see the [Docker website](https://www.docker.com/).
- Ensure that the network ports required by TDengine are not currently in use. For more information, see [Network Port Requirements](../../operations-and-maintenance/system-requirements/#network-port-requirements).

## Procedure

1. Pull the latest TDengine image:

   ```bash
   docker pull tdengine/tdengine:latest
   ```

   :::note
   You can also pull a specific version of the image. For example:

   ```bash
   docker pull tdengine/tdengine:3.3.0.0
   ```

   For enterprise edition, please replace the image name with `tdengine/tdengine-ee`.

   :::

2. Start a container with the following command:

   ```bash
   docker run -d -p 6030:6030 -p 6041:6041 -p 6043-6060:6043-6060 -p 6043-6060:6043-6060/udp tdengine/tdengine
   ```

   To persist data to your local machine, use the following command:

   ```bash
   docker run -d -v <local-data-directory>:/var/lib/taos -v <local-log-directory>:/var/log/taos -p 6030:6030 -p 6041:6041 -p 6043-6060:6043-6060 -p 6043-6060:6043-6060/udp tdengine/tdengine
   ```

3. Verify that the container is running properly:

   ```bash
   docker ps
   ```

4. Enter the container and open a shell:

   ```bash
   docker exec -it <container-name> bash
   ```

   You can now work with TDengine inside your container. For example, you can run the `taos` command to open the TDengine command-line interface.

## What to Do Next

### Test Data Ingestion

Your TDengine installation includes taosBenchmark, a tool specifically designed to test TDengine's performance. taosBenchmark can simulate data generated by many devices with a wide range of configuration options so that you can perform tests on sample data similar to your real-world use cases. For more information about taosBenchmark, see [taosBenchmark](../../tdengine-reference/tools/taosbenchmark/).

Perform the following steps to use taosBenchmark to test TDengine's ingestion performance in your container:

1. In a shell inside your container, run taosBenchmark with the default settings:

   ```bash
   taosBenchmark -y
   ```

taosBenchmark automatically creates the `test` database and the `meters` supertable inside that database. This supertable contains 10,000 subtables, named `d0` to `d9999`, with each subtable containing 10,000 records. Each record includes the following four metrics:

- `ts` (timestamp), ranging from `2017-07-14 10:40:00 000` to `2017-07-14 10:40:09 999`
- `current`
- `voltage`
- `phase`

Each subtable also has the following two tags:

- `groupId`, ranging from `1` to `10`
- `location`, indicating a city and state such as `California.Campbell` or `California.Cupertino`

When the ingestion process is finished, taosBenchmark outputs the time taken to ingest the specified sample data. From this, you can estimate how TDengine would perform on your system in a production environment.

### Test Data Querying

After inserting data with taosBenchmark as described above, you can use the TDengine CLI to test TDengine's query performance in your container:

1. Start the TDengine CLI:

   ```bash
   taos
   ```

2. Query the total number of records in the `meters` supertable:

   ```sql
   SELECT COUNT(*) FROM test.meters;
   ```

3. Query the average, maximum, and minimum values of 100 million records:

   ```sql
   SELECT AVG(current), MAX(voltage), MIN(phase) FROM test.meters;
   ```

4. Query the total number of records where the value of the `location` tag is `California.SanFrancisco`:

   ```sql
   SELECT COUNT(*) FROM test.meters WHERE location = "California.SanFrancisco";
   ```

5. Query the average, maximum, and minimum values of all records where the value of the `groupId` tag is `10`:

   ```sql
   SELECT AVG(current), MAX(voltage), MIN(phase) FROM test.meters WHERE groupId = 10;
   ```

6. Calculate the average, maximum, and minimum values for the `d1001` table every 10 seconds:

   ```sql
   SELECT _wstart, AVG(current), MAX(voltage), MIN(phase) FROM test.d1001 INTERVAL(10s);
   ```
