---
sidebar_label: TDengine Subscriptions
title: TDengine Subscriptions Data Source
description: This document describes how to extract data from one TDengine Cloud instance to another one.
---

TDengine Subscription type of data source is to extract data from the edge side or another TDengine Cloud instance to the currently selected TDengine Cloud instance through TMQ subscription.

## Prerequisites

The prerequisite for using this method is that the user needs to create the corresponding Topic inside the TDengine of the data source, which can be one or more databases, or super or normal tables, or a Topic that has already been created.

## Procedure

1. In TDengine Cloud, open **Data In** page and on the **Data Sources** tab, click **Add Data Source** to open the page. In the **Name** field, input the name and select the **TDengine Subscription** type.
2. In the **Target DB** field, select a database in the current TDengine Cloud instance as the target database.
3. in the **Host** field, configure the IP or domain name of the remote edge side or the other TDengine Cloud instance URL.
4. Configure the port number for the connection in the **Port** field, the default value is empty.
5. in the **Topics** field, configure either a subscription to one or more databases, or a super or normal table, or a Topic that has been created.
6. in the **Protocol** part, configure the connection protocol, the default is Native Connection, can be configured as WS, WSS.
7. in the **Subscribe Options** part, you can configure the subscription to start from the earliest data (earliest) or the latest data (latest), and the default is earliest.
8. In the **Timeout** field, you can configure the timeout time, which can be configured as never: it means no timeout time and the subscription will continue, or you can specify the timeout time: 5s, 1m, etc., and the supported units are ms (milliseconds), s (seconds), m (minutes), h (hours), d (days), M (months), y (years).
9. In the **Authentication** part, you can configure the user name and password for accessing the TDengine server on the remote edge side, the default value of the user name is root and the default value of the password is taosdata; if the data source is other instances of TDengine Cloud, you can select the token authentication method and configure the token of the instance.
10. Click the **Connectivity Check** button to check whether the Cloud instance can be connected to the other TDengine Cloud instance service.
11. After completing the above information, click the **Add** button to start the data synchronization from TDengine to TDengine Cloud instance directly.
