---
sidebar_label: Quick Experience
title: Quick Experience of Inserting and Querying
toc_max_heading_level: 4
---

## Experience Data Insertion

`taosBenchmark` is a tool specifically designed for testing TDengine’s performance. It comprehensively evaluates TDengine's functionality in data insertion, querying, and subscription. This tool can simulate data generated by a large number of devices and allows users to flexibly control strategies such as the number and type of databases, super tables, tag columns, the number and type of data columns, the number of subtables, the amount of data per subtable, the interval between data insertions, the number of working threads, and whether to insert out-of-order data.

Start the TDengine service and execute the following command in the terminal:

```bash
taosBenchmark -y
```

The system will automatically create a super table named `meters` in the `test` database. This super table will contain 10,000 subtables, named from `d0` to `d9999`, with each subtable containing 10,000 records. Each record includes four fields: `ts` (timestamp), `current` (current), `voltage` (voltage), and `phase` (phase). The timestamp ranges from "2017-07-14 10:40:00 000" to "2017-07-14 10:40:09 999". Each table also has two tags: `location` and `groupId`, where `groupId` is set from 1 to 10, and `location` is set to city information such as California.Campbell, California.Cupertino, etc.

After executing this command, the system will quickly complete the insertion of 100 million records. The actual time required depends on hardware performance, but even on a regular PC server, this process usually only takes a few seconds.

`taosBenchmark` provides various options that allow users to customize testing parameters, such as the number of tables and records. To view a detailed list of options, enter the following command in the terminal:

```bash
taosBenchmark --help
```

For more detailed information on how to use `taosBenchmark`, please refer to the [taosBenchmark Reference Manual](../../reference/components/taosbenchmark).

## Experience Querying

After inserting data with `taosBenchmark` as described above, you can experience the querying speed by entering query commands in the TDengine CLI (`taos`).

1. Query the total number of records in the `meters` super table:
```bash
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM test.meters;
```

2. Query the average, maximum, and minimum values of 100 million records:
```bash
SELECT AVG(current), MAX(voltage), MIN(phase) FROM test.meters;
```

3. Query the total number of records where `location = "California.SanFrancisco"`:
```bash
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM test.meters WHERE location = "California.SanFrancisco";
```

4. Query the average, maximum, and minimum values of all records where `groupId = 10`:
```bash
SELECT AVG(current), MAX(voltage), MIN(phase) FROM test.meters WHERE groupId = 10;
```

5. Perform aggregation to calculate the average, maximum, and minimum values for table `d1001` every 10 seconds:
```bash
SELECT _wstart, AVG(current), MAX(voltage), MIN(phase) FROM test.d1001 INTERVAL(10s);
```

In the above queries, the system-provided pseudo-column `_wstart` is used to give the start time of each window.
