---
title: TDengine 3.3.4.3 Release Notes
sidebar_label: 3.3.4.3
slug: /release-history/release-notes/3-3-4-3
---

## New Features

1. feat: the twa function in stream computing support time-driven result push mode.
1. feat: the interp function in stream computing support time-driver result push mode.
1. feat: support Azure Blob

## Optimizations

1. enh: improve the efficiency of pulling data between dnodes when performing large concurrent query.
1. enh: support use AVX2 and AVX512 to perform decoding optimization for double, timestamp and bigint types.
1. enh: adjust the result type of the case when statement.
1. enh: optimized the error msg when compact + split vgroup operation is performed in sequence
1. enh: improve the data scanning speed of the query "select... from... where ts in (...)".
1. enh: add a compatibility guarantee mechanism for stream, to avoid new compatibility issued caused by subsequent functions, but the previously created stream must be deleted and recreated.
1. enh: improve the data synchronization performance of taosX in interlace scenarios.
1. enh: support turn off encoding for integer and float data types.
1. enh: in a multi-replica database, snode must be used in stream computing.
1. enh: generate unique ID to identify each query task to avoid memory corruption.
1. enh: speed up the creation time of the database.
1. enh: modify the default value of s3MigrateEnabled to 0.
1. enh: support recording delete operations in the audit database.
1. enh: support create database in the specified dnode list [enterprise].
1. enh: adjust the error message when deleting data columns of the super table.

[Fixed issues]

1. fix: query performance of last_row has significantly decreased in version 3.3.3.0.
1. fix: taosd cannot start when the WAL entry is incomplete.
1. fix: incorrect query results when partitioning by a constant.
1. fix: when the scalar function include \_wstart and the fill method is prev, the calculation result is wrong.
1. fix: the time zone setting problem on Windows.
1. fix: the translation can't finish if compacting on empty database [enterprise]
1. fix: logic error with transaction conflicts
1. fix: some errors of the mnode can cause transactions to be unable to stop.
1. fix: some errors of the mnode can cause transactions to be unable to stop.
1. fix: the problem of taosc driver retrying errors after clearing the dnode data.
1. fix: after Data Compact is abnormally terminated, intermediate files are not cleaned up.
1. fix: after adding a new column, the earliest mode of the Kafka connector cannot consume the data of the new column.
1. fix: the behavior of the interp function is incorrect when use fill(prev).
1. fix: the problem that TSMA abnormally stops during high-frequency metadata operations.
1. fix: the execution result of the "show create stable" statement is incorrect.
1. fix: the percentile function will crash when querying a large amount of data.
1. fix: syntax error when using partition by and having together.
1. fix: tbname is empty when interp function is used with partition by tbname, c1.
1. fix: taosd may crash while writing illegal boolean values through stmt.
1. fix: library symbol 'version' conflict with other lib which use the same symbol.
1. fix: the number of JAVA process handles in JDBC driver keeps increasing on Windows environment.
1. fix: the occasional startup failure when upgrading from version 3.3.3.1 to 3.3.4.0.
1. fix: memory leak caused by repeated addition and deletion of tables on the Windows platform.
1. fix(stream): check the right return code for concurrent checkpoint trans.
1. fix: the "too many session" problem while perform large concurrent queries.
1. fix: the problem of TDengine CLI crashing in slow query scenarios on the Windows platform.
1. fix: the encrypted database cannot be recovered when opening the dnode log.
1. fix: the problem that taosd cannot be started due to mnode synchronization timeout.
1. fix: the slow sorting of file group data during snapshot synchronization leads to the inability of Vnode to recover.
1. fix: when writing data with escape characters to a varchar field through line protocol, taosd will crash.
1. fix: metadata file damage caused by incorrect logic processing of error code
1. fix: when a query statement contains multiple nested "not" conditional statements, not setting the scalar mode will lead to query errors.
1. fix: the problem of dnode going offline due to timeout of vnode stat report.
1. fix: taosd failed to start on servers that not support AVX instructions.
1. fix(taosX): handle 0x09xx error codes in migration
