---
title: TDengine 3.3.5.8 Release Notes
sidebar_label: 3.3.5.8
description: Version 3.3.5.8 Notes
slug: /release-history/release-notes/3.3.5.8
---

## Features

  1. feat: support tmq subscription with ONLY META in JDBC
  2. feat: support multiple-line SQL editor in Grafana
  3. feat: add support for VARBINARY/GEOMETRY in ODBC
  4. feat: support TDengine with ODBC driver in Excel
  5. feat: taosX agent use specific port range in local connection

## Enhancements

  1. enh: websocket handle consumer error when tmq polled nothing
  2. enh: JDBC add support for unsigned integers
  3. enh: expose global.written_concurrent configuration for kafka/mqtt/csv in Explorer
  4. enh: support integration with TDgpt in community version
  5. enh: support BinaryRowData type in flink
  6. enh: in stmt2 SQL statements, the LIMIT clause supports the use of ? as a parameter placeholder
  7. enh: enable compression via websocket in taosX backup
  8. enh: ODBC support SQL_ROWSET_SIZE in SQLSetStmtAttr
  9. enh: expose num.of.consumers/writters configurations in Explorer
 10. enh: Add connector files to the macOS installation package.
 11. enh: handle errors when poll result is null in rust connector
 12. enh: tsbs support csv output format
 13. enh: add Classified Connections Counts table in TDinsight
 14. enh: use consist float precision in explorer and tao shell
 15. enh: flink table support update/delete
 16. enh: taosX agent will resume connection when taosX server disconnected for long time

## Fixes

  1. fix: explorer support signup email with dot `.`
  2. fix: flock syscall error on aws cloud storage in taosAdapter
  3. fix: modify boolean tag values in sub-tables results in erroneous metadata from data subscriptions.
  4. fix: allow spaces in columns of csv in explorer datain
  5. fix: resolved the issue of high CPU usage by the stmtbind thread when the system is in an idle state
  6. fix: health state tick to idle when no data consumed
  7. fix: fix security issues in JDBC sample code
  8. fix: fix upgrade compatibility issue of taosX
  9. fix: ODBC core when set SQL_ATTR_TXN_ISOLATION with SQLSetConnectAttr
 10. fix: received/processed_messages should be reset when task rerun
 11. fix: when restoring data using taosX, it may crash if the database is not specified
 12. fix: when creating a database, the keep_time_offset options supports suffixes h (hours) and d (days) for time values
 13. fix: potential deadlocks while drop stream
 14. fix: failed to write data in a dual-replica database when a single dnode is disconnected from the network
 15. fix: when querying the information_schema.ins_tables table, a "Sync leader is unreachable" error may be triggered if the Leader of the mnode changes.
 16. fix: the time-filtering query results involving composite primary keys were incorrect after data compact
 17. fix: when the join condition of the primary key column is not a simple equality condition, it may lead to incorrect JOIN results
 18. fix: error caused by cursor.fetchmany with custom length in python taosws
 19. fix: the issue where the "show grants" command returned an incorrect number of columns
 20. fix: unexpected backup points before schedule executing
 21. fix: taosX task does not restart after interrupted
 22. fix: jdbc select server_version() caused mem high-usage
 23. fix: when using the WHERE tbname IN () statement, executing LAST query may cause taosd crash if the subtables filtered out do not belong to the same super table
 24. fix: after taosd exits abnormally and is restarted, if the WAL that has not been written to the data file is too large, it may cause an OOM error during startup
 25. fix: when using interp interpolation, if the select list contains string constants or string tags, the returned string content may be incomplete.[#29353](https://github.com/taosdata/TDengine/issues/29353)
 26. fix: when performing a JOIN query on a super table, using a subquery as the right table may lead to missing results
 27. fix: syntax error while use DISTINCT and ORDER BY together.[#29263](https://github.com/taosdata/TDengine/issues/29263)
 28. fix: when using the CAST function to convert a floating-point number to a binary and then performing a comparison, the result may be inaccurate due to loss of precision[#29382](https://github.com/taosdata/TDengine/issues/29382)
 29. fix: after upgrading from version 3.3.4 to 3.3.5, the taosd service fails to start properly if the configured charset does not exist in the system
 30. fix: websocket api timing field should not be negative
 31. fix: duplicates backup points in taosX
 32. fix: configuration item s3BucketName was incorrectly set as a global variable, leading to failures while file uploads to S3.
