---
title: TDengine 3.3.6.6 Release Notes
sidebar_label: 3.3.6.6
description: Version 3.3.6.6 Notes
slug: /release-history/release-notes/3.3.6.6
---

## Features

  1. feat: taosAdapter add process/connection-pools metrics etc.
  2. feat: support initialization scripts in docker image
  3. feat: subscribe database/stable in jdbc
  4. feat: TDgpt support covariate forecasting
  5. feat: add mqtt received bytes metric

## Enhancements

  1. enh: connectors support special chars in password
  2. enh: increasing backup support interval < 60s
  3. enh: use consist error style in c websocket connection
  4. enh: adjust the authorization strategy for dual-node, dual-replica scenarios
  5. enh: upgrade JDBC connection in DBeaver
  6. enh: refine the timeout parameter in taosX backup
  7. enh: improve taosX backup performance
  8. enh: config parameter minReservedMemorySize supports hot updates.
  9. enh: taosX rename 2.x to TDengine Query, 3.x to Data Subscription
 10. enh: adjust the alter logic of the KEEP property for the super table
 11. enh: improve initialization performance in taosBenchmark

## Fixes

  1. fix: when data contains a mix of null, none, and value entries, synchronizing data via TMQ may cause taosAdapter to crash
  2. fix: creating streams on virtual sub-tables with a NOTIFY statement produces no data in the super table
  3. fix: deadlock when websocket writes data using stmt2.
  4. fix: when using STMT write mode, failed SQL parsing can lead to memory leaks.
  5. fix: memory leaks when writing with STMT2 in multi-threaded mode
  6. fix: support chinese chars in taos shell with ws connection
  7. fix: timezone in taos.cfg not work in taosc websocket connection
  8. fix: multiple prepare operations on the same STMT statement can cause the program to crash.
  9. fix: multiple prepare operations on an STMT statement may report error.
 10. fix: allow spaces between \G and ;
 11. fix: taosBenchmark -s parameter parse error in
 12. fix: ensure uid/pwd are passed during ws_connect in ODBC
 13. fix: taosBenchmark create table with tag values cause core dump
 14. fix: when the time unit of timetruncate is set to y, it causes taosd to crash.
 15. fix: the reference to the zlib repository had the CVE-2023-45853 vulnerability
 16. fix: fix CVE-2024-56337 in JDBC example code
 17. fix: when querying a virtual table, an error "Table Schema is old" occurs if the query column order doesn't match the physical table's column order.
 18. fix: fix possible panic in exec of rust connector
 19. fix: support double-quote in opcua node id
 20. fix: stuck on stopping status when stop after connection failed
 21. fix: fix data lost in case of taosAdapter interrupted under sparse mode
 22. fix: when synchronizing data snapshots between multiple replicas, network failures that cause duplicate data transmission can lead to query errors
 23. fix: when user privlilege are updated, restarting taosd may cause client subscriptions to occasionally fail.
 24. fix: taosBenchmark json cfgdir not work
 25. fix: fix authentication failure in case of special chars in Explorer
 26. fix: when a DB contain a virtual table, setting snapshot=true in the subscription parameters causes taosd to coredump during subscription.
 27. fix: show create table and desc table statements return composite key instead of primary key
 28. fix: incorrect measurement point calculation when using virtual tables
 29. fix: stream compute on virtual tables was not triggered correctly.
 30. fix: taosX mem leak with native connection
 31. fix: fix copy-and-paste error in case of sql containing spaces in explorer
 32. fix: schema is old when origin table's column has same prefix during virtual supertable query
 33. fix: virtual tables can not detecting table schema changes
 34. fix: dedup timestamp in transformer now generator
 35. fix: stream computing result table not being fully created in certain situations
 36. fix: taosd fails to start after upgrading from 3.3.6.2 to 3.3.6.3.
 37. fix: taosd fails to start after modifying the timezone configuration parameter.
 38. fix: When subscribing, if the consumer's held WAL version has been deleted due to WAL file rolling, the subscription will fail.
 39. fix: Driver was not loaded error when using native connection on Mac platform
 40. fix: the number of windows in an Interval query is incorrect in the nanosecond database.
 41. fix: tables with decimal types may crash when filtering with tag conditions.
 42. fix: when the forecast function is provided with exactly the same data, some algorithms will report an error.
 43. fix: error when executing "DROP VTABLE IF EXISTS" on a non-existent virtual table.
 44. fix: error alert in explorer
 45. fix: migration cause error when rename table and schema mismatch
