---
title: TDengine 3.3.3.0 Release Notes
sidebar_label: 3.3.3.0
description: Version 3.3.3.0 Notes
slug: /release-history/release-notes/3-3-3-0
---

### New Features/Optimizations

1. Added function support: pi, truncate/tunc, exp, ln, mod, rand, sign, degrees, radians, char, ascii, position, trim, replace, repeat, substring, substr, substring_index, week, weekday, weekofyear, dayofweek, stddev_pop, var_pop
2. Multi-level storage supports Microsoft Object Storage Azure Blob [Enterprise Edition]
3. Support for MongoDB data source [Enterprise Edition]
4. TDengine supports macOS Enterprise Edition client [Enterprise Edition]
5. `taosX` logs do not write to syslog by default [Enterprise Edition]
6. Server records all slow query information to the log database
7. Added server version number to the query result of `SHOW CLUSTER MACHINES` [Enterprise Edition]
8. Removed reserved keywords LEVEL/ENCODE/COMPRESS, can be used as column names/table names/database names, etc.
9. Dynamic modification of temporary directory is prohibited
10. Round function: supports rounding precision
11. Timediff function: returns the result of timestamp expr1 - expr2, supports negative results, and approximates to the precision specified by time_unit
12. Max/min functions: support strings as input parameters; when input parameters are string types, return the maximum string value
13. Improved the performance of `taosX` data synchronization [Enterprise Edition]
14. Unified storage strategy for slow queries and ordinary logs
15. Optimized the issue of large offset files and slow loading in the subscription function
16. Upgraded JDBC driver to 3.2.5
17. Kafka connector commits changed to synchronous mode
18. New parameter: whether to report an exception when the table query does not exist
19. Expanded the maximum window of `tsma` interval to 1 year
20. Supports bulk table creation from CSV files

### Issues Fixed

1. MQTT write tasks do not automatically restart after server restart [Enterprise Edition]
2. Fixed the issue where agent and PI connector connection errors on Windows caused task termination [Enterprise Edition]
3. After restarting `taosadapter`, MQTT tasks fail to sync data [Enterprise Edition]
4. MQTT write task status is incorrect on Explorer [Enterprise Edition]
5. Tasks running after restarting `taosX` are not rescheduled [Enterprise Edition]
6. Optimized log output information for `taosX` MongoDB DataIn tasks [Enterprise Edition]
7. Fixed the backup failure issue when the `local.toml` file is empty [Enterprise Edition]
8. `taosX` replica task data synchronization issue after network disconnection recovery [Enterprise Edition]
9. Fixed the metadata synchronization issue when upgrading from version 3.1 to 3.3 [Enterprise Edition]
10. MQTT tasks cannot automatically recover after `taosadapter` restarts abnormally [Enterprise Edition]
11. Kafka DataIn task status is normal, but the task stops consuming data [Enterprise Edition]
12. Fixed the issue of crash caused by querying `LAST + INTERVAL`
13. Hot updating `stt_trigger` during data writing causes `taosd` to crash
14. `taoskeeper` repeatedly restarts after changing the root password
15. Stream computing cannot continue after service restart in cloud services
16. `tsdb` loading cache causes `taosd` deadlock
17. Error when specifying fill value as 0 during query
18. `LAST_ROW` query results do not match expectations
19. User specifying `information_schema` database causes `taosd` to crash
20. `GROUP BY` statements support positional parameters and alias syntax
21. Metadata cloning function object error causes crash
22. Cursor error during data filling when updating cache causes `taosd` to exit abnormally
23. STDDEV function calculation result is randomly incorrect
24. Unable to add offline nodes in multi-level storage and encryption scenarios
25. `taos CLI` cannot input passwords longer than 20 bytes
26. Error when concatenating SQL for writing: int data overflow
27. Consistency of metadata under high concurrent query scenarios
28. Attempted to solve the issue where tasks cannot stop when manually clicking the stop button
29. Resolved the issue of CSV file export error when columns or tags contain commas or quotes
30. Crash caused by concurrent describing of the same subtable in multi-threading
31. Query results from the data browser are not displayed according to the configured timezone
32. Memory leak issue in `taosadapter` when creating WebSocket connections
33. Community edition cannot start normally on RedHat operating system
34. Invalid assertion causing crash in scenarios where two `stt` are located in data block timeline distribution holes
35. Issue where S3 fails to pull data after a long time
36. Using result set function to determine the orderliness of the timeline
37. Solved the issue of slow supertable projection queries
38. Fixed: In a multi-node environment, transaction return code inconsistent with transaction status causes transaction backlog
39. Fixed: Error of reappearing data after deletion in `stt_trigger = 1`
40. Excessive memory usage of `taosd` during node recovery leads to OOM
41. Error in judgment when limit is too small
42. Connectivity and obtaining sample data functionality for AVEVA historian data source
43. Issue where `taosd` service cannot be stopped normally
44. Crash caused by querying `LAST` function on fully empty columns
45. Triggering assert causes core dump when querying `cid` not in the current version of schema
46. OOM issue when writing message body is too large; increased `syncLogBufferMemoryAllowed` parameter to control
47. Query error when timezone is set to UTC and data contains "1970"
48. Cancel waiting timeout for message synchronization on `mnode` nodes
49. Authorization status of the cluster becomes invalid after abnormal recovery of cluster nodes
50. Query null pointer issue
51. When restoring `vnode`, temporarily set `vgroup` to single replica
52. SQL reserved words can be used as column names to create supertables, and can also be used as tag names
53. Continuous growth of memory during high-concurrency queries
54. Crash caused by assertion failure during checkpoint processing in stream computing
55. Fixed the issue in version 3.3.2.8.0820 where tables not found in `information_schema` could be queried
56. Excessive memory usage of `taosd` during node recovery leads to OOM
57. Fixed the issue of `taosd` crashing when importing data through `taosX` under schema change
58. Possible memory leak
59. Client memory leak
60. Open source users cannot modify other database options after upgrading `stt_trigger` value
61. Query results for `NOT IN (NULL)` are incorrect
62. `taos shell` and `taosBenchmark` cannot successfully connect to cloud service instances
