---
title: TDengine 3.3.4.8 Release Notes
sidebar_label: 3.3.4.8
description: Version 3.3.4.8 Notes
slug: /release-history/release-notes/3-3-4-8
---

## New Features

1. feat: Interp function supports the fill(near) mode, supports returning the timestamp where the original data is located, and supports finding interpolations within a specified range.

## Optimizations

1. enh: improve the query performance of TSBS.
2. enh: support alter multiple tag values of a single child table at the same time.
3. enh: optimize the error code of the status window.
4. enh: reduce resource consumption in the force window close mode of stream computing.
5. enh: remove the restriction that window query must include aggregate functions.

## Fixed issues

1. fix: use websocket in node.js example of explorer
2. fix: the problem that WAL is not distributed to multiple level-0 mount points.
3. fix: abnormal exit of stream computing may lead to a deadlock.
4. fix(taosX): fix drop table unexpected error when point set enable=0 in opc csv
5. fix: failed to read WAL file when alter WAL_level from 0 to 2.
6. fix: deadlock when create snode.
7. fix: The race condition during replica snapshot synchronization.
8. fix: the performance degradation of the percentile function after upgrading to 3.3.4.3.
9. fix: the info of dataDir in ins_dnode_variables is incomplete.
10. fix: WHERE condition not work in statements with INTERP function
11. fix: taosd restart failed while use force window close mode in stream computing.
12. Fix: SQL statements containing "GROUP BY constants" will report "Executor internal error".
13. fix: fix OPC-DA connection incorrect NOCONFIG error
14. fix: in force_window_close mode, the stream computing fails to generate the sub-table names according to the specified rules.
15. fix: 'schema is old' occurring in schemaless write mode under specific scenarios. [28846](https://github.com/taosdata/TDengine/issues/28846)
16. fix: taosX sync with subscription may lost messages in websocket
17. fix: incorrect sub-table count when filtering by tags (which may cause taosdump crash).
18. fix: restart a single dnode when RPC compression is enabled may lead to an abnormal cluster state.
19. fix: unexpected Grafana alerting with CASE WHEN
20. fix: taosd may crash when performing UNION queries frequently.
21. fix: subscribe with enable.auto.commit=false not work as expected
