---
title: TDengine 3.3.5.0 Release Notes
sidebar_label: 3.3.5.0
description: Version 3.3.5.0 Notes
slug: /release-history/release-notes/3-3-5-0
---

## Features

  1. feat: refactor MQTT to improve stability and performance
  2. feat: refactor taosX incremental backup-restore
  3. feat: add stmt2 apis in JDBC via websocket connection
  4. feat: add stmt2 api in Rust connector
  5. feat: add error codes in error prompts in TDengine CLI
  6. feat: superSet can connect TDengine with python connector
  7. feat: configurable grafana dashboards in explorer management
  8. feat: add taosX-agent in-memory cache queue capacity option

## Enhancements

  1. enh: adjust the reporting mechanism of telemetry.
  2. enh: support for SQL-based statistics of disk space for a specified DB.
  3. enh: add memory management for SQL queries on the server side
  4. enh: interval clause allows the use of the AUTO keyword to specify the window offset.
  5. enh: reduce the impact on data write performance during data migration across multi-level storage
  6. enh: migrate from angular to react for grafana 11.3+
  7. enh: refactor taosAdapter websocket api for a slightly better perf
  8. enh: add health state in taosX task status
  9. enh: taosX add configurations to handle exceptions
 10. enh: support setting options for client connections, including time zone, character set, user IP, and user name.
 11. enh: taosdump support retry after connection timeout or broken
 12. enh: allow creating index for tags that already subscribed
 13. enh: taosX now support literal special chars in password
 14. enh: improve data write performance when Last Cache is activated.
 15. enh: compact command supports automatic execution, concurrency setting, and progress observation.
 16. enh: support update global configuration parameters through SQL statements and persisting them.
 17. enh: update the default compression method for all data types to improve the compression ratio in most scenarios.
 18. enh: taosBenchmark --nodrop fix for mac/window
 19. enh: prohibit the simultaneous execution of DB compaction and replica change operations (Enterpris).
 20. enh: taosdump support primary key tables
 21. enh: display user IP and name in the results of the SHOW QUERIES and SHOW CONNECTIONS statements.
 22. enh: (JDBC)support batch insertion into multiple tables
 23. enh: support for dynamically modifying the dataDir parameter for multi-level storage.
 24. enh: prefer db file under data_dir
 25. enh: enforce users to set strong passwords, which must be 8 to 16 characters in length and include at least three types of characters from the following: uppercase letters, lowercase letters, numbers, and special characters.
 26. enh: improve the speed at which clients acquire the new Leader.
 27. enh: support negative regex pattern in opc point selector

## Fixes

  1. fix: the potential for deadlocks when updating checkpoints in stream computing under high-load scenarios.
  2. fix: write tmq data into target error when terrno already set
  3. fix: taosd cannot start when there is data corruption in a block within the WAL
  4. fix: taosBenchmark fails when taosd disconnected in replica 2/3
  5. fix: log files being lost when they are switched frequently.
  6. fix: the stream computing stops due to the data update within the window.
  7. fix: libtaosws.so sets an incorrect error code when the connection is terminated while fetch data.
  8. fix: taosX opc error in case of @-prefixed name
  9. fix: fix permission denied with show vgroups sql in cloud
 10. fix: fix sql syntax error when migrating from large stables with compress options
 11. fix: incorrect memory estimation for vnode usage
 12. fix: failed to perform UNION ALL query on constant strings of the varchar type.
 13. fix: leader transfer during the execution of transaction may cause deadlock.
 14. fix: rust connector invliad pointer addr in ws_stmt_get_tag_fields
 15. fix: union statement fails when executing with subqueries containing multiple NULLs.
 16. fix: the pause operation of stream computing might fail.
 17. fix: when writing data into a sub-table with a table name length of 192 characters using an SQL statement, errors may occur if the table name is enclosed in backticks (`).
 18. fix: when performing a join query on super tables across different databases, if each database contains only one vnode, the query will return an error.
 19. fix: no enough disk space cause taosX panic
 20. fix: when write data to a super table, using both bound and unbound simultaneously will trigger an exception.
 21. fix: metrics non-exist cause panic when connect with agent
 22. fix: when creating indexes for tag with a large character length, taosd may crash.
 23. fix: when the input parameters for the functions first, last, last_row, and char exceed 127, the taosd may crash. [29241](https://github.com/taosdata/TDengine/issues/29241)
 24. fix: when the number of rows in the result set of the LIMIT statement exceeds the size of a single data block, the returned count does not match the expectation.
 25. fix: when synchronizing data between clusters, if the target task is deleted, the source cluster may run out of memory
 26. fix: metadata read-write lock misconfiguration leads to a very small chance of blocking writes.
 27. fix: when importing CSV files using the INSERT INTO statement on the Windows platform, the absence of a newline character at the end of the file may lead to an issue of infinite loop reading.
 28. fix: after the tags of the table are updated, the stream computing fails to recognize and apply the ne values.
 29. fix: fix kafka timeout issue and improve performance and stability
 30. fix: in sql queries, when both 'is null' and invalid 'in' filter conditions are included simultaneously, the query results are incorrect. [29067](https://github.com/taosdata/TDengine/issues/29067)
 31. fix: sql queries containing both 'IN' and 'BETWEEN' filter conditions result in incorrect query results. [28989](https://github.com/taosdata/TDengine/issues/28989)
 32. fix: when performing multiplication or division operations between timestamp and numeric types, the results are incorrect. [28339](https://github.com/taosdata/TDengine/issues/28339)
 33. fix: data type conversion error in the IN statement leads to incorrect query results. [29047](https://github.com/taosdata/TDengine/issues/29047) [28902](https://github.com/taosdata/TDengine/issues/28902)
 34. fix: the error in filtering results when constant conditions are combined with OR operators. [28904](https://github.com/taosdata/TDengine/issues/28904)
 35. fix: when performing subtraction operation on timestamp type, the negative value is not considered. [28906](https://github.com/taosdata/TDengine/issues/28906)
 36. fix: tag values may display incorrectly when using GROUP BY tag synatix
 37. fix: gcc < 10 bug cause taosX compile error
