---
title: TDengine 3.3.6.3 Release Notes
sidebar_label: 3.3.6.3
description: Version 3.3.6.3 Notes
slug: /release-history/release-notes/3.3.6.3
---

## Features

  1. feat: taosBenchmark should support decimal datatype
  2. feat: add dnode information and components status
  3. feat: support auto commit in websocket subscription
  4. feat: add suggestions in case of large-throughput queries

## Enhancements

  1. enh: taosBenchmark ctrl-c fast exit
  2. enh: reduce taosX db size
  3. enh: allow users without sysinfo privileges to execute the show anodes command.
  4. enh: stream computing supports the cols function.
  5. enh: support '/' in python taosrest connector
  6. enh: changed the keyword for composite primary keys from "primary key" to "composite key"
  7. enh: taosdump restore backups in case of cols del/add

## Fixes

  1. fix: explorer support signup email with dot `.`
  2. fix: user registration page not exist in oss explorer3
  3. fix: writing out-of-order data via stm2 may fail
  4. fix: when performing interval fill(prev) and sorting by _wstart, if there are null values encountered, the results may be incorrect.
  5. fix: the follower vnode sometimes remains in the restore=false state for a long time after restart
  6. fix: firstEp setting in taos.cfg not work in taosBenchmark
  7. fix: in STMT2 high-efficiency write mode, the write operation will fail when the value of the geometry field is NULL.
  8. fix: the createdb option does not work when creating user
  9. fix: support migration with sysinfo=0 in taosX
 10. fix: the deadlock issue caused by the failure of regex release during the taosd exit process
 11. fix: frequent creation and deletion of TOPIC causes TDB's disk space usage to keep growing.
 12. fix: windows compile error
 13. fix: call stmt_set_tags again after stmt_set_tbname_tags may cause memory leak.
 14. fix: taosX allow deleting tasks in "created" status
 15. fix: fix data lost in case of taosAdapter interrupted under sparse mode
 16. fix: leader election failure in a two-replica database under high throughput.
 17. fix: false alarm when update the database parameter s3_compact
 18. fix: SQL statements do not return when deleting a database with offline vnodes
 19. fix: explorer database name now case-sensitive
 20. fix: when rolling back a failed change from a single replica to three replicas, data cleanup errors during the rollback process can lead to the failure of the change.
 21. fix: when the length of the condition field in the system table information_schema.ins_user_privileges exceeds 32 characters, the displayed content is incomplete.
 22. fix: allow regular users to execute the show disk_info command
 23. fix: tables error in case of taosBenchmark input with csv
 24. fix: explorer max password length should be 255
 25. fix: excel odbc loading data error via websocket
 26. fix: stream computing result table not being fully created in certain situations
 27. fix: when the transaction to create a database fails, repeatedly sending messages can cause high CPU usage.
 28. fix: the number of file groups displayed by the "show compacts" command does not match the actual number.
 29. fix: stream task fails to start after the rolling upgrade.
 30. fix: the checkpointBackupDir being too large in the stream task.
 31. fix: when using Websocket parameter binding to batch write data, Chinese characters in subtable names will cause garbled text[#29998](https://github.com/taosdata/TDengine/issues/29998)
 32. fix: TDgpt may yield abnormal results when running on the ARM64 platform.
 33. fix: ftmt binding failure followed by re-binding causes a crash.
