---
title: TDengine 3.3.6.0 Release Notes
sidebar_label: 3.3.6.0
description: Version 3.3.6.0 Notes
slug: /release-history/release-notes/3.3.6.0
---

## Features

  1. feat: supports Decimal data type
  2. feat: improve compatibility of taosc
  3. feat: support retrieving the values of other columns in the row returned by the single-row selection function through the cols keyword.
  4. feat: integrate with haixun database api
  5. feat: support constant as join primary key
  6. feat: change the max value of minFreeDiskSize to 2TB
  7. feat: supports control the retention period of time-series data in the supertable via the KEEP parameter.
  8. feat: support backup to s3 storage in taosX
  9. feat: efficient data writing in JDBC
 10. feat: improve error handling of taosX
 11. feat: support persistent cache to guarantee data completement
 12. feat: iterate with perspective BI library
 13. feat: support taos_validate_sql in websocket
 14. feat: integrate Tableau with ODBC driver
 15. feat: supports virtual table
 16. feat: taosbechmark can generate csv files
 17. feat: TDengine now integrate with FineBI
 18. feat: supports the use of virtual tables in stream computing
 19. feat: stream computing supports the continue_window_close trigger mode.
 20. feat: stream computing supports window event notification
 21. feat: stream computing support setting a minimum duration limit for event window and state window.
 22. feat: support for greatest and least Functions
 23. feat: provide an alias regexp for the operator match.
 24. feat: experimental decimal data types support in explorer
 25. feat: support decimal types in rust connector
 26. feat: taosX/agent support https connection
 27. feat: explorer add support for sql formatter
 28. feat: taosX support export/import data-in tasks
 29. feat: support request ts as primary key in opc-da

## Enhancements

  1. enh: when the topic enables the "only meta" option, the data subscription interface will no longer transmit time-series data.
  2. enh: support compact TDB files.
  3. enh: execute stream creation asynchronously to reduce response time.
  4. enh: improve kafka performance in taosX
  5. enh: support index creation for tag fields of nchar and varchar types.
  6. enh: significantly enhance the data synchronization performance between clusters
  7. enh: optimize the distribution of data files across multiple disks within the same tier in multi-level storage
  8. enh: connectors support new subscription params
  9. enh: improve the write performance of automatic table creation
 10. enh: taosX should raise error when WAL retention period is 0
 11. enh: improve error messages in explorer
 12. enh: improve performance of mqtt fetching messages
 13. enh: c# connector add async receiver for websocket connection
 14. enh: filter timestamp by configuration for hebei power transform
 15. enh: support stmt via websocket in taosBenchmark
 16. enh: increase the error troubleshooting information for dual-replica databases
 17. enh: improve consumer polling strategy in  ws(taosAdapter)
 18. enh: Interp function supports interpolation over a time range.
 19. enh: support for monitoring vnode recovery progress through SQL
 20. enh: tracking new database with replica cli
 21. enh: support the use of conditional expressions in the CAST function
 22. enh: supports using the LIKE keyword in the SHOW VARIABLES series commands to enable pattern matching for variable names.
 23. enh: root can view/edit all tasks in explorer
 24. enh: OPCDA datasource table template can use  `{/tagname}{id}{_id}` extractor
 25. enh: introduce the "assign leader" command for dual-replica clusters to address the issue of cluster recovery when a dnode with a higher WAL version fails to start.
 26. enh: optimize the service recovery time of a dual-replica cluster after a single-node failure
 27. enh: refactor the STMT code to significantly enhance query and write performance.
 28. enh: improve benchmark writing robotics
 29. enh: extend the maximum password length to 255 characters.
 30. enh: when subscribe data, consumers can set the minimum rows and maximum waittime.
 31. enh: respect to log.* settings in configuration for opc logs
 32. enh: C taosws support session.timeout.ms
 33. enh: support long passwords with special characters in all components
 34. enh: support additional subscription parameters in JDBC
 35. enh: Python consumer can subscribe topic using newly added parameters
 36. enh: allow newly added subscription params without updating connectors
 37. enh: MQTT fallback to ssl when tcp failed
 38. enh: add a percentage sign (%) after the compression ratio value in the results displayed by show disk_info.
 39. enh: includes inspection tools in the Enterprise Edition.
 40. enh: stream computing supports sliding window in the force_window_close mode
 41. enh: supports silent uninstallation of the tar package using the -e parameter.
 42. enh: improve the efficiency of downsampling and group by tag queries
 43. enh: taosX does not allow start repeatedly
 44. enh: add DST(Daylight Saving Time) guideline
 45. enh: improve cpu/mem performance in OPC data-in
 46. enh: use fixed seconds format in explorer table view
 47. enh: support deletion of topics with active consumers.

## Fixes

  1. fix: OOM may occur when dropping a super table containing a large number of child-tables.
  2. fix: taosX util to read archived data
  3. fix: explorer should raise error when password is not valid
  4. fix: In stmt2 interlace mode, asynchronous execution returns incorrect affectrow count.
  5. fix: explorer display error reason for backup tasks
  6. fix: vnode may go offline when dnode is overloaded
  7. fix: stream computing experiences a significant backlog of transactions during vgroup leader switch, resulting in computational delays.
  8. fix: fix explorer oss --version error
  9. fix: support special characters of password in Node.js
 10. fix: random value out of range in taosBenchmark
 11. fix: fix os error 10053 on windows for OPCUA
 12. fix: taosX panic when adapter/nginx restarted in some cases
 13. fix: the results of the show disk_info command are incorrect when configuring multi-level storage.
 14. fix: typo in the execution result of `show <database>.disk_info`
 15. fix: when querying super table, using ORDER BY and LIMIT together may return an unexpected record.
 16. fix: allow health params in 2.x data-in
 17. fix: backup next execution time does allow past time
 18. fix: fix compatibility of backup task upgrading to latest
 19. fix: query error when performing a UNION operation on multiple nested queries.
 20. fix: in state window queries, if the same expression exists in both the PARTITION BY and SELECT clauses, it will cause taosd to crash.
 21. fix: when the subquery does not return any results but contains the LIMIT 1 clause, it may cause the result of the parent query to be abnormal or inaccurate.
 22. fix: taosc crash when table names contain `*`
 23. fix: on windows, closing a JDBC PreparedStatement while writing data may cause the JVM to crash.[#30106](https://github.com/taosdata/TDengine/issues/30106)
