---
title: TDengine 3.3.8.8 Release Notes
sidebar_label: 3.3.8.8
description: Version 3.3.8.8 Notes
slug: /release-history/release-notes/3.3.8.8
---

## Features

  1. feat: taosX add KingHistorian data-in
  2. feat: taosX add new datasource: pulsar & tuya

## Enhancements

  1. enh: active-active support enable WAL marker to lock WAL
  2. enh: C WebSocket connector performance optimized
  3. enh: improve startup speed of stream with historical data
  4. enh: support caching filter results of tag equality conditions in stream
  5. enh: c/rust websocket connection support conn_timeout
  6. enh: clarified error messages for white noise check failures in the data completion algorithm
  7. enh: enhanced error messages for unresolvable or unreachable hostnames to indicate the root cause more clearly
  8. enh: TDgpt's imputation function supports arbitrary sampling intervals
  9. enh: taosX data migration supports conn_timeout
 10. enh: Add debug commands like vi, ps, etc. to Docker
 11. enh: improve corner case memory usage to avoid oom
 12. enh: taosX improve mem usage and speedup for flat stream
 13. enh: Explorer extracted columns can be extracted in chain
 14. enh: add maxSQLLength to set the maximum length of SQL statements
 15. enh: Rust websocket connection support read timeout
 16. enh: taosX archive file size and count limit
 17. enh: simplified the retry logic in the query process, and uniformly used maxRetryWaitTimes to control the maximum retry time
 18. enh: remove info log for points in opcda
 19. enh: OpenTSDB data-in support customized table name
 20. enh: speedup perf when table not exist for tmq to td
 21. enh: taosX import csv in batches
 22. enh: improve recovery speed after restart in clusters with multiple vnodes requiring data synchronization
 23. enh: allow TMQ subscription to TSDB v3.1.x
 24. enh: taosX support migration with additional WHERE condition
 25. enh: taosX support reclaim memory by interval or sighup

## Fixes

  1. fix: event window of stream does not create output table when no data output.
  2. fix: taosX data synchronization included extra non-qualifying table structures.
  3. fix: fix a mem-leak issue of taosBenchmark
  4. fix: stream trigger incorrectly handles NULL values during DELETE-triggered recalculation
  5. fix: historical data triggering of stream state window does not support the extend parameter
  6. fix: stream compatibility issues when upgrading from version 3.3.7 to 3.3.8
  7. fix: incorrect calculation result of the state window when the data block boundary is a null value
  8. fix: incorrect window splitting in RSMA function when the timestamp is negative
  9. fix: leader switchover failure of dual-replica mnode.
 10. fix: election during snapshot transmission in the synchronization module causes a deadlock
 11. fix: stream sliding windows for virtual super tables lacked sub-table names in message notifications
 12. fix: resolve the issue where virtual super tables do not support SELECT DISTINCT TAGS queries
 13. fix: resolve the issue where a UNION query returns incorrect results if one of its subqueries contains only constant conditions in the WHERE clause
 14. fix: memory leak when MQTT subscription exits
 15. fix: resolve the memory leak issue when referencing virtual tables in stream
 16. fix: resolve the issue where virtual super tables do not support SELECT COUNT(1) queries
 17. fix: resolve the issue where the DERIVATIVE function returns an extra row in the result set when the query includes the tbname column
 18. fix: Resolved Docker image upgrade start-up failure after changing the taosd password, affecting versions 3.3.8.0–3.3.8.4
 19. fix: virtual table stream does not trigger computing as expected
 20. fix: time resolution processing error in TDgpt's Prophet algorithm model
 21. fix: query result error when the state window's extend value is 1 and the end of the window is all empty data
 22. fix: explorer input eroro when extract or filter preview
 23. fix: taosX fix mem increase and panic in archive in case of taosd errors
 24. fix: fix schema only backup restore error
 25. fix: crash caused by memory cleanup when sync message sending fails
 26. fix: TSDB Lite Explorer loading is slow
 27. fix: fix description attribute error in some special OPC-UA servers
 28. fix: multiple selections of namespaces cause error
 29. fix: fix unexpected taosX filtered metrics
 30. fix: query does not return the correct error code when it is killed
 31. fix: precision error in decimal constant conversion
 32. fix: stream cannot restart after adding new column mappings to the virtual table
 33. fix: failed to restore vnode when there are a large number of null values
 34. fix: resolved issue where virtual table queries failed after adding or removing Schema in their corresponding sub-tables.
 35. fix: time precision error in the last_compact column of the ins_filesets system table
 36. fix: stream repeatedly reports window opening events after restart
 37. fix: upgrade arrow dependencies for jdk21
 38. fix: reduce OpenTSDB log file size for taosX
 39. fix: InfluxDB data source table name inconsistent with disorder tags
 40. fix: error writing BLOB data type via super table auto-creation statements
