---
title: TDengine 3.4.0.9 Release Notes
sidebar_label: 3.4.0.9
description: Version 3.4.0.9 Notes
slug: /release-history/release-notes/3.4.0.9
---

## Features

  1. feat: taosAdapter add token support for subscription
  2. feat: taosdump support import/export virtual tables

## Enhancements

  1. enh: massive ui enhancement for explorer
  2. enh: optimize the impact of frequent child table tag modifications on data writing when child tables of super table have subscriptions
  3. enh: table name template support expression
  4. enh: improve performance of virtual table queries with the tbname column
  5. enh: reduce log files to 3
  6. enh: adjust the maximum value of configuration parameter supportVnodes from 4096 to 1024
  7. enh: CREATE XNODE TASK error message refinement

## Fixes

  1. fix: Kafka connection check log refinement
  2. fix: the GRANT ALL permission does not take effect when granted to a specific stream
  3. fix: the START/STOP STREAM permission does not take effect after being granted
  4. fix: failed to drop stream when having the DROP STREAM permission
  5. fix: taosd crashes when querying a view without permission
  6. fix: the ALTER VIEW permission does not take effect after being granted
  7. fix: auditor fails to view the complete user information
  8. fix: stream crashes when reading the timestamp of a table with a varchar-type composite primary key
  9. fix: failed to drop role using the IF EXISTS syntax
 10. fix: the error message is unclear when permissions are missing
 11. fix: port occupancy keeps increasing on macOS when calling the taos_query method of the native connection
 12. fix: in stream subquery, JOIN statements falsely report the error of missing timestamp primary key when using time placeholders such as _twstart as the first column of query results
 13. fix: timestamp columns in query results are incorrectly set when stream subquery contain interval windows
 14. fix: audit database creation operations fails to return when the data encryption key is not set
 15. fix: ordinary users lack write permission without explicit authorization after creating ordinary tables
 16. fix: modify the names of newly added encryption functions to keywords to resolve the issue of keywords being incorrectly written as actual content into the database during data writing
 17. fix: timetruncate function occasionally returns no results
 18. fix: unexpected error log when create xnode
 19. fix: expand parser length to 48k in taosX
 20. fix: no response in explorer tmq connection check
 21. fix: str len calculation error cause create clause error with invalid raw data len
 22. fix: create task via agent error
 23. fix: Explorer alert syntax error when switching tag to share topics
 24. fix: xnode task stuck at created status
 25. fix: Grid auto scalable in Explorer
 26. fix: reading tinyint(1)/boolean type for mysql
 27. fix: memory leak caused by unreleased auto table creation requests during STMT data writing
 28. fix: explorer backup task create error
 29. fix: opcplc special point id cause data points list error
 30. fix: data in tasks api respond as empty after created successfully
 31. fix: Explorer batch operation api error
 32. fix: build task update sql error in explorer
 33. fix: fast-xml-parser CVE-2026-25896
 34. fix: xnoded role time check error cause exit unexpectedly
 35. fix: the merge logic processes data incorrectly when stream handles out-of-order data of trigger tables with primary keys
 36. fix: client crashes when querying decimal data type using stmt
 37. fix: the scan interval is judged incorrectly when sliding < interval during stream sliding trigger
 38. fix: during the stream trigger phase, when pending calculation requests are accumulated, max_delay triggering resets the waiting time, resulting in the calculation not being triggered for a long time
 39. fix: taosX compatible with 3.4.x information_schema query result changes
 40. fix: invalid user login cause adapter memory increase
