---
title: TDengine 3.4.1.0 Release Notes
sidebar_label: 3.4.1.0
description: Version 3.4.1.0 Notes
slug: /release-history/release-notes/3.4.1.0
---

## Features

  1. feat: taosgen support windows
  2. feat: Explorer support token response in login
  3. feat: TDgpt adds support for the multivariate anomaly detection feature
  4. feat: taosgen support setting log options in config file
  5. feat: OPC-UA connection test support failover
  6. feat: kafka transformer support filter to split messages to multiple schema
  7. feat: mcp server for TDengine TSDB
  8. feat: data subscription supports token-based login
  9. feat: add support for the ANY/SOME/ALL/EXISTS/NOT EXISTS operators
 10. feat: explorer support bearer token auth
 11. feat: taosX support system & object level privileges
 12. feat: support scalar subqueries without the FROM clause
 13. feat: Go REST connector support TOKEN auth
 14. feat: support multitple brokers in MQTT task
 15. feat: subscription function adds support for metadata changes of virtual tables
 16. feat: add the timeout notification function for stream when no new data is written to source child tables/virtual child tables
 17. feat: support external window query with time range explicitly specified by subquery, suitable for complex analysis scenarios such as cross-event correlation, window reuse and hierarchical filtering
 18. feat: add identity authentication functions
 19. feat: support uncorrelated scalar subquery
 20. feat: support non-correlated subqueries in IN operator
 21. feat: the fill clause of interval and interp supports surround time range
 22. feat: explorer support totp auth
 23. feat: support batch modification of child table tag values
 24. feat: stream adds support for scheduled calculation by natural week, month, quarter, and year dimensions
 25. feat: support the lag function
 26. feat: taosd adds support for the data repair mode
 27. feat: taosdump now support BLOB data type
 28. feat: go websocket subscription support token auth
 29. feat: rust subscription support token auth
 30. feat: taosdump now support decimal data type
 31. feat: c websocket subscription support token auth
 32. feat: taosX new data-in pSpace
 33. feat: taosKeeper add endpoint for exporting all metrics
 34. feat: KingHistorian dataset auto update
 35. feat: XNODED now works on Windows
 36. feat: taosX add task owner privileges
 37. feat: KingHistorian support non-stop migration when end timestamp set empty

## Enhancements

  1. enh: RESTORE DNODE command supports specifying VGROUP ID
  2. enh: auto review session in explorer
  3. enh: JDBC doc recommend use varcharAsString=true for taos-ws
  4. enh: improve the query performance of aggregate queries with GROUP BY on virtual super tables
  5. enh: optimize the query performance of interval, session, event windows for virtual super tables
  6. enh: add support for TDgpt functionality on the Windows platform
  7. enh: optimize query performance when virtual tables reference many columns of physical tables
  8. enh: add support for ANY/SOME/ALL/EXISTS/NOT EXISTS operators in stream
  9. enh: optimize the query performance of state windows for virtual super tables
 10. enh: add support for the IN operator in subqueries of stream
 11. enh: add security protection capabilities against SQL injection
 12. enh: correct comparison results of NULL values in the IN operator
 13. enh: optimize the reporting logic of slow logs to improve the accuracy and timeliness of reporting
 14. enh: provide clearer error messages for SQL statements
 15. enh: improve the performance of last_row queries
 16. enh: add support for the configuration parameter AuditSaveInSelf; when enabled, audit information is recorded without going through taoskeeper
 17. enh: add the capability of forced overwriting after sensitive data deletion
 18. enh: prohibit connection between Community Edition and Enterprise Edition
 19. enh: return clear error information when virtual table creation fails, such as type matching failure of a specific column
 20. enh: Explorer auto scale json parser input
 21. enh: Improve the performance when subqueries are used as primary key filter conditions
 22. enh: taos shell supports logging in via token
 23. enh: add support for subqueries in stream computing scenarios
 24. enh: add reference verification capabilities between virtual tables and source tables, including reference relationship storage, source table change verification, reference relationship query and virtual table availability verification functions
 25. enh: display query execution progress for the SHOW QUERIES statement
 26. enh: support dynamic adjustment of LRU shard count to improve the execution performance of Last queries
 27. enh: add support for CAST and SUBSTR functions on BLOB type
 28. enh: Improve the subscription speed in the scenario of interlace writing
 29. enh: push down the time filter conditions of non-correlated subqueries to improve the batch query performance of virtual tables
 30. enh: upgrade the explain analyze function, fix the deviation in operator execution time statistics, add various operator indicators, improve result readability
 31. enh: join/window join supports operations based on selection function resultsets
 32. enh: optimize the fill(prev/next/near/linear) filling syntax of the interp function to support filling with non-NULL values before/after the target position
 33. enh: add support for child table addition/deletion, child table tag value modification, and column mapping relationship adjustment to the trigger mechanism of virtual super tables in stream
 34. enh: stream supports multi-group batch computation
 35. enh: support batch deletion of stream computing
 36. enh: add NODELAY_CREATE_SUBTABLE option for stream to create result tables in advance when no data is written
 37. enh: when the password is incorrect in the subscription scenario, return the same "Authentication failure" error message as that of taos connection
 38. enh: TDgpt server uses Gunicorn instead of uWSGI as the service driver
 39. enh: Explorer Licence page refinement
 40. enh: add support for stream functionality on the Windows platform
 41. enH: taosdump add support for stmt2
 42. enh: improve explorer ui for data-in tasks and transform
 43. feat: explorer can enable CAPTCHA on login
 44. enh: C/Rust websocket connector security enhancement
 45. enh: add support for the enableGrantLegacySyntax parameter; when set to 1, the authorization syntax of v3.4 is compatible with v3.3
 46. enh: OPC custom tag support special chars replacing
 47. enh: taosX backup allow backup checkout when offset checking failed
 48. enh: add protection capabilities against Denial of Service (DoS) attacks
 49. enh: add protection capabilities against overflow attacks
 50. enh: optimize the timer logic after system time changes
 51. enh: Explorer activation input auto scale
 52. enh: support modifying the PASSWORD_LIFE_TIME, PASSWORD_REUSE_TIME, PASSWORD_REUSE_MAX, and ALLOW_TOKEN_NUM attributes of the ROOT user, and set the minimum password validity period to 1 day by default
 53. enh: remove the forceReadConfig parameter

## Fixes

  1. fix: fix the dmp file generation mechanism on Windows platform
  2. fix: add the configuration item enableAdvancedSecurity (default value is 0), which disables the password expiration, strong password and password rotation policy when set to 0(this behavior is consistent with v3.3)
  3. fix: explorer sql injection vulnerability
  4. fix: taosKeeper/taosAdapter security enhancement
  5. fix: taosX breakpoint db lock race condition issue with multiple csv
  6. fix: kafka data-in use full list json instead of json items
  7. fix: vgroups information is not included when taosdump restores the database
  8. fix: automatically trim spaces around sub table name in transform page
  9. fix: incorrect query result issue of session window on virtual super tables
 10. fix: Explorer preview table unexpected when parsing error
 11. fix: query exception caused by inconsistent column types between virtual child table and mapped source table (usually due to adding or deleting columns with the same name)
 12. fix: OPCDA dataset collection possibly interrupt
 13. fix: incorrect configuration of the dynamic modification range for ssEnabled
 14. fix: the default value of the SS_CHUNKPAGES parameter does not take effect
 15. fix: XNODE replication task can't start
 16. fix: stream computing sliding(0s) incorrectly returns success
 17. fix: potential crash when the SAMPLE function processes data exceeding the int32 range
 18. fix: the IF EXISTS option does not take effect when using DROP TSMA
 19. fix: no results returned when explain parses subqueries
 20. fix: stream fails to calculate historical data when using FILL_HISTORY
 21. fix: schema and tag synchronization issue when the stream result table already exists
 22. fix: resolve the issue of failed rawdata data subscription
 23. fix: the SQL statement content queried from the system table ins_streams is incomplete
 24. fix: "Invalid value in client" error is triggered when querying virtual super tables
 25. fix: explorer extraction rules cause error when removed
 26. fix: subscription empty cause user permission error in explorer
 27. fix: the query reports a "Planner slot key not found" error when querying the timestamp and data column of a virtual child table if the data column does not reference the source table
 28. fix: unexpected task status for query migration tasks
 29. fix: the filter conditions for Agg aggregation results in stream do not take effect
 30. fix: taosd crashes when a virtual table executes an aggregation query with the partition by tag clause
 31. fix: the "Operation not supported" error is thrown when the compact operation is executed during data upload in the shared storage scenario
 32. fix: the "Permission denied or target object not exist" error is reported when executing drop table if exists db.not_exist_table even though the user has the table drop permission
 33. fix: when a user with sysinfo0 permission views fields without access rights, the behavior is consistent with version v3.3.8, where an error is thrown instead of returning a NULL value
 34. fix: taosd crashes when executing a Last query to read BLOB type data
 35. fix: taosc and taosd crashes when the trim function is called in an expression or function
 36. fix: data is still output when the result set of queries containing JOIN operations is empty in stream
 37. fix: crash when querying with parameter binding on virtual tables
 38. fix: PyTorch inference runtime execution fails due to missing gcc-related components in the TDgpt Docker image
 39. fix: query result is incorrect when a constant is used as the start time filter condition in a stream query statement
 40. fix: the logic for limiting display to the first 100 rows fails in taos shell when a subquery contains the LIMIT clause
 41. fix: incorrect logic for releasing temporary files in the stream leads to continuous increase of disk space during runtime
 42. fix: unable to select target database in tsdb import task dialog
 43. fix: opcda retrieves empty data points
 44. fix: the occasional crash issue when querying virtual super tables
 45. fix: TDinsight taosX panel task info error
 46. fix: task not restored in other xnodes when one stopped
 47. fix: taosX sync error with varbinary/blob datatype
 48. fix: explorer support relative-path in reverse-proxy
 49. fix: SHOW XNODE TASKS should be ordered by id
 50. fix: taosd crash issue when comparing two tag columns with index usage
 51. fix: data-in filter cause parameter lost in explorer
 52. fix: the extremely low-probability crash issue that occurs when subscriptions and stream computing are used simultaneously with high concurrency
 53. fix: taosd CPU usage remains high due to rapid generation of a large number of logs after enabling all log debug switches
 54. fix: some vnodes stop consuming when subscriptions return no data for a prolonged period
 55. fix: Explorer changing xor_allowed_duration_secs in toml not work
 56. fix: the ROOT user reports insufficient permissions when performing some operations after upgrading from v3.3.8 to v3.4.0.0-1 and then to 3.4.0.2 and later versions
 57. fix: fix the potential crash issue when interval operator read SMA data instead of raw data
 58. fix: password with special chars cause ws request error
 59. fix: long parser error mislead root cause
 60. fix: replication task cause bad request error
 61. fix: the potential crash issue triggered when two statements with aggregate queries are combined via UNION ALL
